---
layout: post
title: GnuPG，关联 GPG, OpenGPG, key management, key server, 私钥， 公钥， arch linux， manjaro， pacman
categories: [ ]
tags: []
---

* 参考
  * [wiki.archlinux.org - GnuPG](https://wiki.archlinux.org/title/GnuPG)
  * [GnuPG图形前端](https://wiki.archlinux.org/title/List_of_applications/Security#Encryption,_signing,_steganography)
  * [Wikipedia:Public key fingerprint](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Public_key_fingerprint)
  * [fake keys found in the wild](https://lore.kernel.org/lkml/20160815153401.9EC2BADC2C@smtp.postman.i2p/)
  * [GnuPG - WKD](https://wiki.gnupg.org/WKD#Implementations)
  * [GnuPG - Configuration-Options](https://www.gnupg.org/documentation/manuals/gnupg-devel/GPG-Configuration-Options.html)
  * [pacman/Package signing](https://wiki.archlinux.org/title/Pacman/Package_signing)
  * [pacman.conf - package and database signature checking](https://man.archlinux.org/man/pacman.conf.5#PACKAGE_AND_DATABASE_SIGNATURE_CHECKING)



GnuPG，也被称为GPG， 是 OpenGPG 标准（RFC 4880，即 PGP）的完整免费实现。


## 安装：

~~~
sudo pacman -S gnupg
~~~

KDE 下安装图形前端： 

~~~sh
# archlinux
sudo pacman -S kgpg
# ubuntu
sudo apt install kgpg
~~~


## 配置

默认存储配置的目录：  `~/.gnupg` ，这个目录权限一般是 `700` ，其中文件的权限是 `600`

### gpg 程序的配置文件： gpg.conf

`gpg` 程序是 GnuPG 主要入口。

用户的 gpg.conf 在 `~/.gnupg/gpg.conf`
全局的 gpg.conf 在 `/etc/gnupg/gpg.conf`

配置文件的语法： gpg 命令的参数，去掉 `--` 可写入配置文件中，每行一个参数

例如，命令 `gpg --no-default-keyring --keyring keyring-path ...`

对应配置文件的例子： 

~~~
no-default-keyring
keyring keyring-path
~~~


### dirmngr 程序的配置文件： dirmngr.conf

`dirmngr` 是一个内部程序，被 `gpg` 调用来访问 keyserver。

用户的 dirmngr.conf 在 `~/.gnupg/dirmngr.conf`
全局的 dirmngr.conf 在 `/etc/gnupg/dirmngr.conf`


### pacman

`pacman` uses a different set of configuration files for package signature verification. 

参考 ： [pacman/Package signing](https://wiki.archlinux.org/title/Pacman/Package_signing)



## 使用


### Create a key pair

~~~
gpg --full-gen-key
~~~

* 默认使用 RSA 加密
* 默认 key 大小为 3072
* key 有效期一般设置为一年，后期可续期，不用重新生成key。
* 不用设置comment，这个功能据说有问题。
* `name` 和 `email`，是公共信息，任何后面导入 key 的用户都能看见。
* `--gen-key` 参数，只需要输入 `name` 和 `email`，其他都是默认值。


### List keys

~~~sh
# To list keys in your public key ring:
$ gpg --list-keys

# To list keys in your secret key ring:
$ gpg --list-secret-keys
~~~


### Export your public key


To generate an ASCII version of a user's public key to file public-key.asc (e.g. to distribute it by e-mail):

~~~sh
$ gpg --export --armor --output public-key.asc user-id
~~~

* Add `--no-emit-version` to avoid printing the version number, or add the corresponding setting to your configuration file.
* You can omit the `user-id` to export all public keys within your keyring. This is useful if you want to share multiple identities at once, or for importing in another application, e.g. Thunderbird.


### Import a public key

In order to encrypt messages to others, as well as verify their signatures, you need their public key. 

使用 `gpg --import` 命令或者 `keyserver` 来导入公钥。

~~~sh
To import a public key with file name public.key to your public key ring:

$ gpg --import public-key.asc
~~~

arch-linux pacman包需要导入 key ID，参见：

* [pacman/Package signing#Managing the keyring](https://wiki.archlinux.org/title/Pacman/Package_signing#Managing_the_keyring)
* [Makepkg#Signature checking](https://wiki.archlinux.org/title/Makepkg#Signature_checking)



### keyserver

发布公钥

~~~sh
gpg --send-keys key-id
~~~

搜索公钥

~~~sh
gpg --search-keys user-id
~~~

To import a key from a key server:

~~~sh
gpg --recv-keys key-id
~~~


`auto-key-retrieve` 添加到 GPG 的配置文件，将会在需要时候，自动下载公钥。


#### key servers

有名的 keyserver：

* Ubuntu Keyserver: federated, no verification, keys cannot be deleted.
  <https://keyserver.ubuntu.com/>
* Mailvelope Keyserver: central, verification of email IDs, keys can be deleted.
  <https://keys.mailvelope.com/>
* keys.openpgp.org: central, verification of email IDs, keys can be deleted, no third-party signatures (i.e. no Web of Trust support).
  <https://keys.openpgp.org/>

更多的key server ， 参见： <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Key_server_(cryptographic)#Keyserver_examples>


#### 设置 key server

配置文件设置：

`~/.gnupg/dirmngr.conf`

~~~
keyserver hkp://keyserver.ubuntu.com
~~~

命令中临时指定：

~~~sh
gpg --keyserver hkps://keys.openpgp.org/ --search-keys user-id
~~~


#### 当前使用的 key server

参考： 
  * [stackexchange.com - GPG key server for key search?](https://unix.stackexchange.com/questions/352759/gpg-key-server-for-key-search)
  * <https://unix.stackexchange.com/a/663031>


有名的 key server 之间会相互同步公钥，所以其实使用哪个都差不多，除了网速上可能有不同。

要知道默认使用的什么 key server ，可以 search key 看下，例如：

~~~sh
# 到pacman缓存的包文件找个签名，看下包签名的key id
cd /var/cache/pacman/pkg

gpg --verify zxing-cpp-1.4.0-1-x86_64.pkg.tar.zst.sig 
gpg: 假定被签名的数据在‘zxing-cpp-1.4.0-1-x86_64.pkg.tar.zst’
gpg: 签名建立于 Fri 08 Jul 2022 03:50:49 AM CST
gpg:               使用 RSA 密钥 1519D5ABA65BF6FC2B73C7567A4E76095D8A52E4
gpg: 无法检查签名：缺少公钥

gpg -v --search-keys 1519D5ABA65BF6FC2B73C7567A4E76095D8A52E4
gpg: data source: https://162.213.33.9:443
(1)     Antonio Rojas <arojas@archlinux.org>
        Antonio Rojas <nqn76sw@gmail.com>
        Antonio Rojas <nqn1976@gmail.com>
        Antonio Rojas <arojas@us.es>
          4096 bit RSA key 4AC5588F941C2A25, 创建于：2014-10-21

# 看下这个服务器域名，原来就是 keyserver.ubuntu.com
host 162.213.33.9
9.33.213.162.in-addr.arpa domain name pointer keyserver.ubuntu.com.
~~~



#### tips

* If receiving fails with the message gpg: `keyserver receive failed: General error,` and you use the default hkps keyserver pool, make sure set the HKPS pool verification certificate with `hkp-cacert /usr/share/gnupg/sks-keyservers.netCA.pem` in your `dirmngr.conf` and kill the old dirmngr process.

* If receiving fails with the message `gpg: keyserver receive failed: Connection refused`, try using a different DNS server.

* You can connect to the keyserver over `Tor` with `Tor#Torsocks`. Or using the `--use-tor` command line option. 

* You can connect to a keyserver using a proxy by setting the `http_proxy` environment variable and setting `honor-http-proxy` in `dirmngr.conf`. Alternatively, set `http-proxy host[:port]` in the configuration file to override the environment variable of the same name. Restart the `dirmngr.service` user service for the changes to take effect.









### Web Key Directory


The Web Key Service (WKS) 是一个key分发的新标准，根据email 的 domain 确定的 key server，称为 Web Key Directory(WKD)。

When encrypting to an email address (e.g. user@example.com), GnuPG (>=2.1.16) will query the domain (example.com) via HTTPS for the public OpenPGP key if it is not already in the local keyring. 

The option `auto-key-locate` will locate a key using the WKD protocol if there is no key on the local keyring for this email address.

~~~sh
gpg --recipient user@example.org --auto-key-locate --encrypt doc
~~~

To check if your key can be found in the WKD you can use this [webinterface](https://metacode.biz/openpgp/web-key-directory).



## Key 维护

### 备份私钥

备份

~~~sh
gpg --export-secret-keys --armor --output private-key.asc user-id
~~~

导入

~~~sh
gpg --import private-key.asc
~~~


## pacman 包的签名和认证

`/etc/pacman.conf` 配置文件中有定义包签名认证的相关安全选项：

* `SigLevel` 选项

决定 `pacman -S` 安装软件时，认证的强度（the level of trust）。

The `SigLevel` directive is valid in both the `[options]` and repository sections. 

If used in `[options]`, it sets a default value for any repository that does not provide the setting.

* If set to `Never`, no signature checking will take place.
* If set to `Optional` , signatures will be checked when present, but unsigned databases and packages will also be accepted.
* If set to `Required`, signatures will be required on all packages and databases.

**When to Check**

These options control if and when signature checks should take place.
`Never`

All signature checking is suppressed, even if signatures are present.

`Optional` (default)

Signatures are checked if present; absence of a signature is not an error. An invalid signature is a fatal error, as is a signature from a key not in the keyring.

`Required`

Signatures are required; absence of a signature or an invalid signature is a fatal error, as is a signature from a key not in the keyring.

**What is Allowed**

These options control what signatures are viewed as permissible. Note that neither of these options allows acceptance of invalid or expired signatures, or those from revoked keys.

`TrustedOnly `(default)

If a signature is checked, it must be in the keyring and fully trusted; marginal trust does not meet this criteria.

`TrustAll`

If a signature is checked, it must be in the keyring, but is not required to be assigned a trust level (e.g., unknown or marginal trust).

Options in both groups can additionally be prefixed with either `Package` or `Database`, which will cause it to only take effect on the specified object type. For example, `PackageTrustAll` would allow marginal and unknown trust level signatures for packages.




























































